The asteroid belt is a torus-shaped region in the Solar System, located roughly
between the orbits of the planets Jupiter and Mars. It contains a great many
solid, irregularly shaped bodies, of many sizes, but much smaller than planets,
called asteroids or minor planets which are on average about one million
kilometers (or six hundred thousand miles) apart. This asteroid belt is also
called the main asteroid belt or main belt to distinguish it from other
asteroid populations in the Solar System such as near-Earth asteroids and
trojan asteroids.[1]

The asteroid belt is the smallest and innermost known circumstellar disc in the
Solar System. About 60% of its mass is contained in the four largest asteroids:
Ceres, Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea. The total mass of the asteroid belt is
calculated to be 3% that of the Moon.[2]

Ceres, the only object in the asteroid belt large enough to be a dwarf planet,
is about 950 km in diameter, whereas Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea have mean
diameters less than 600 km.[3][4][5][6] The remaining bodies range down to the
size of a dust particle. The asteroid material is so thinly distributed that
numerous unmanned spacecraft have traversed it without incident.[7]
Nonetheless, collisions between large asteroids occur and can produce an
asteroid family, whose members have similar orbital characteristics and
compositions. Individual asteroids within the belt are categorized by their
spectra, with most falling into three basic groups: carbonaceous (C-type),
silicate (S-type), and metal-rich (M-type).

The asteroid belt formed from the primordial solar nebula as a group of
planetesimals.[8] Planetesimals are the smaller precursors of the protoplanets.
Between Mars and Jupiter, however, gravitational perturbations from Jupiter
imbued the protoplanets with too much orbital energy for them to accrete into a
planet.[8][9] Collisions became too violent, and instead of fusing together,
the planetesimals and most of the protoplanets shattered. As a result, 99.9% of
the asteroid belt's original mass was lost in the first 100 million years of
the Solar System's history.[10] Some fragments eventually found their way into
the inner Solar System, leading to meteorite impacts with the inner planets.
Asteroid orbits continue to be appreciably perturbed whenever their period of
revolution about the Sun forms an orbital resonance with Jupiter. At these
orbital distances, a Kirkwood gap occurs as they are swept into other
orbits.[11]

Classes of small Solar System bodies in other regions are the near-Earth
objects, the centaurs, the Kuiper belt objects, the scattered disc objects, the
sednoids, and the Oort cloud objects.

On 22 January 2014, European Space Agency (ESA) scientists reported the
detection, for the first definitive time, of water vapor on Ceres, the largest
object in the asteroid belt.[12] The detection was made by using the
far-infrared abilities of the Herschel Space Observatory.[13] The finding was
unexpected because comets, not asteroids, are typically considered to "sprout
jets and plumes". According to one of the scientists, "The lines are becoming
more and more blurred between comets and asteroids".[13]
