An asteroid is a minor planet of the inner Solar System. Sizes and shapes of
asteroids vary significantly, ranging from 1-meter rocks to a dwarf planet
almost 1000 km in diameter; they are rocky, metallic or icy bodies with no
atmosphere.

Of the roughly one million known asteroids[1] the greatest number are located
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, approximately 2 to 4 AU from the Sun,
in the main asteroid belt. Asteroids are generally classified to be of three
types: C-type, M-type, and S-type. These were named after and are generally
identified with carbonaceous, metallic, and silicaceous compositions,
respectively. The size of asteroids varies greatly; the largest, Ceres, is
almost 1,000 km (600 mi) across and qualifies as a dwarf planet. The total mass
of all the asteroids combined is only 3% that of Earth's Moon. The majority of
main belt asteroids follow slightly elliptical, stable orbits, revolving in the
same direction as the Earth and taking from three to six years to complete a
full circuit of the Sun.[2]

Asteroids have been historically observed from Earth; the Galileo spacecraft
provided the first close observation of an asteroid. Several dedicated missions
to asteroids were subsequently launched by NASA and JAXA, with plans for other
missions in progress. NASA's NEAR Shoemaker studied Eros, and Dawn observed
Vesta and Ceres. JAXA's missions Hayabusa and Hayabusa2 studied and returned
samples of Itokawa and Ryugu, respectively. OSIRIS-REx studied Bennu,
collecting a sample in 2020 to be delivered back to Earth in 2023. NASA's Lucy,
launched in 2021, will study eight different asteroids, one from the main belt
and seven Jupiter trojans. Psyche, scheduled for launch in 2023, will study a
metallic asteroid of the same name.

Near-Earth asteroids can threaten all life on the planet; an asteroid impact
event resulted in the Cretaceousâ€“Paleogene extinction. Different asteroid
deflection strategies have been proposed; the Double Asteroid Redirection Test
spacecraft, or DART, was launched in 2021 and intentionally impacted Dimorphos
in September 2022, successfully altering its orbit by crashing into it.
