A black hole is a region of spacetime where gravity is so strong that nothing,
including light or other electromagnetic waves, has enough energy to escape its
event horizon.[2] The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently
compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole.[3][4] The boundary of
no escape is called the event horizon. Although it has a great effect on the
fate and circumstances of an object crossing it, it has no locally detectable
features according to general relativity.[5] In many ways, a black hole acts
like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light.[6][7] Moreover, quantum
field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking
radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely
proportional to its mass. This temperature is of the order of billionths of a
kelvin for stellar black holes, making it essentially impossible to observe
directly.

Objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were
first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon
Laplace.[8] In 1916, Karl Schwarzschild found the first modern solution of
general relativity that would characterize a black hole. David Finkelstein, in
1958, first published the interpretation of "black hole" as a region of space
from which nothing can escape. Black holes were long considered a mathematical
curiosity; it was not until the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a
generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars by
Jocelyn Bell Burnell in 1967 sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed
compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality. The first black hole known
was Cygnus X-1, identified by several researchers independently in 1971.[9][10]

Black holes of stellar mass form when massive stars collapse at the end of
their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can grow by absorbing mass
from its surroundings. Supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses
(Mâ˜‰) may form by absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes.
There is consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centres of most
galaxies.

The presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other
matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Any matter
that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by
friction, forming quasars, some of the brightest objects in the universe. Stars
passing too close to a supermassive black hole can be shredded into streamers
that shine very brightly before being "swallowed."[11] If other stars are
orbiting a black hole, their orbits can determine the black hole's mass and
location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such
as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar
black hole candidates in binary systems and established that the radio source
known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of the Milky Way galaxy, contains a
supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.

On 11 February 2016, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and the Virgo
collaboration announced the first direct detection of gravitational waves,
representing the first observation of a black hole merger.[12] On 10 April
2019, the first direct image of a black hole and its vicinity was published,
following observations made by the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) in 2017 of the
supermassive black hole in Messier 87's galactic centre.[13][14][15] As of
2021, the nearest known body thought to be a black hole is around 1,500
light-years (460 parsecs) away (see list of nearest black holes). Though only a
couple dozen black holes have been found so far in the Milky Way, there are
thought to be hundreds of millions, most of which are solitary and do not cause
emission of radiation.[16] Therefore, they would only be detectable by
gravitational lensing.
