A comet is an icy, small Solar System body that, when passing close to the Sun,
warms and begins to release gases, a process that is called outgassing. This
produces a visible atmosphere or coma, and sometimes also a tail. These
phenomena are due to the effects of solar radiation and the solar wind acting
upon the nucleus of the comet. Comet nuclei range from a few hundred meters to
tens of kilometers across and are composed of loose collections of ice, dust,
and small rocky particles. The coma may be up to 15 times Earth's diameter,
while the tail may stretch beyond one astronomical unit. If sufficiently
bright, a comet may be seen from Earth without the aid of a telescope and may
subtend an arc of 30Â° (60 Moons) across the sky. Comets have been observed
and recorded since ancient times by many cultures and religions.

Comets usually have highly eccentric elliptical orbits, and they have a wide
range of orbital periods, ranging from several years to potentially several
millions of years. Short-period comets originate in the Kuiper belt or its
associated scattered disc, which lie beyond the orbit of Neptune. Long-period
comets are thought to originate in the Oort cloud, a spherical cloud of icy
bodies extending from outside the Kuiper belt to halfway to the nearest
star.[1] Long-period comets are set in motion towards the Sun from the Oort
cloud by gravitational perturbations caused by passing stars and the galactic
tide. Hyperbolic comets may pass once through the inner Solar System before
being flung to interstellar space. The appearance of a comet is called an
apparition.

Comets are distinguished from asteroids by the presence of an extended,
gravitationally unbound atmosphere surrounding their central nucleus. This
atmosphere has parts termed the coma (the central part immediately surrounding
the nucleus) and the tail (a typically linear section consisting of dust or gas
blown out from the coma by the Sun's light pressure or outstreaming solar wind
plasma). However, extinct comets that have passed close to the Sun many times
have lost nearly all of their volatile ices and dust and may come to resemble
small asteroids.[2] Asteroids are thought to have a different origin from
comets, having formed inside the orbit of Jupiter rather than in the outer
Solar System.[3][4] The discovery of main-belt comets and active centaur minor
planets has blurred the distinction between asteroids and comets. In the early
21st century, the discovery of some minor bodies with long-period comet orbits,
but characteristics of inner solar system asteroids, were called Manx comets.
They are still classified as comets, such as C/2014 S3 (PANSTARRS).[5]
Twenty-seven Manx comets were found from 2013 to 2017.[6]

As of November 2021 there are 4584 known comets.[7] However, this represents a
very small fraction of the total potential comet population, as the reservoir
of comet-like bodies in the outer Solar System (in the Oort cloud) is about one
trillion.[8][9] Roughly one comet per year is visible to the naked eye, though
many of those are faint and unspectacular.[10] Particularly bright examples are
called "great comets". Comets have been visited by unmanned probes such as the
European Space Agency's Rosetta, which became the first to land a robotic
spacecraft on a comet,[11] and NASA's Deep Impact, which blasted a crater on
Comet Tempel 1 to study its interior.
