The Oort cloud (/ɔːrt, ʊərt/),[1] sometimes called the Öpik–Oort cloud,[2]
first described in 1950 by the Dutch astronomer Jan Oort,[3] is a
theoretical[4] concept of a cloud of predominantly icy planetesimals proposed
to surround the Sun at distances ranging from 2,000 to 200,000 AU (0.03 to 3.2
light-years).[note 1][5] It is divided into two regions: a disc-shaped inner
Oort cloud (or Hills cloud) and a spherical outer Oort cloud. Both regions lie
beyond the heliosphere and are in interstellar space.[5][6] The Kuiper belt,
the scattered disc and the detached objects, the other three reservoirs of
trans-Neptunian objects, are less than one thousandth as far from the Sun as
the Oort cloud.

The outer limit of the Oort cloud defines the cosmographic boundary of the
Solar System and the extent of the Sun's Hill sphere.[7] The outer Oort cloud
is only loosely bound to the Solar System, and thus is easily affected by the
gravitational pull both of passing stars and of the Milky Way itself. These
forces occasionally dislodge comets from their orbits within the cloud and send
them toward the inner Solar System.[5] Based on their orbits, most of the
short-period comets may come from the scattered disc, but some short-period
comets may have originated from the Oort cloud.[5][8]

Astronomers conjecture that the matter composing the Oort cloud formed closer
to the Sun and was scattered far into space by the gravitational effects of the
giant planets early in the Solar System's evolution.[5] Although no confirmed
direct observations of the Oort cloud have been made, it may be the source that
replenishes most long-period and Halley-type comets entering the inner Solar
System, and many of the centaurs and Jupiter-family comets as well.[8]
